In King's Landing, Tyrion becomes acting Hand of the King, much to Cersei's dismay. At Dragonstone, Stannis proclaims allegiance to the priestess Melisandre's God of Light and claims the Iron Throne, having revealed Joffrey's bastardy. Joffrey orders all of King Robert's bastards slaughtered. One of King Robert's bastards Gendry, along with the disguised Arya, have escaped the city and are being taken to Castle Black. Having won three victories, Robb Stark, who is now proclaimed as the King of the North, offers the Lannisters peace in exchange for the North's independence and Sansa's and Arya's safe return. He sends Theon to gain Balon Greyjoy's support, and Catelyn to seek an alliance with Renly Baratheon, who also claims the crown. Beyond the Wall, the Night's Watch shelters with Craster and his daughters/wives. In Essos, as her people slowly die in the Red Waste, Daenerys dispatches three riders to conduct reconnaissance.
Returning to Pyke Island after nine years as the Starks' ward, Theon is reunited with his sister, Yara, and his father, Balon, who despises Theon's acquired Northern ways. Balon rejects Robb's proposed alliance and plans to reclaim Iron Island independence by force. In King's Landing, Cersei rejects Robb's peace terms, while Tyrion exiles the untrustworthy Janos Slynt, head of the Gold Cloaks, to the Night's Watch, and promotes Bronn in his place. En route to Castle Black, Arya, impersonating a boy, reveals her true identity to Gendry. At Craster's Keep, north of the Wall, Samwell Tarly is approached by Gilly, one of Craster's daughters. Gilly fears for her unborn child if it is a boy; Jon Snow resists helping, despite Sam's pleas. In the Red Waste, a horse returns to Daenerys' camp with its rider's severed head in a pouch, a message from her enemies. In Dragonstone, former smuggler Ser Davos Seaworth, who now serves Stannis, recruits the pirate Salladhor Saan and his fleet to Stannis' side. Stannis attempts to sire a male heir with Melisandre, as his wife, Selyse has failed to produce a son. Jon discovers that Craster sacrifices his sons to the White Walkers; Craster catches him spying and knocks Jon unconscious.
Catelyn arrives at Renly's camp to negotiate an alliance. The female warrior, Brienne of Tarth, wins the right to join Renly's kingsguard by defeating Loras in a practice dual. Renly has recently wed Margaery Tyrell, Loras's sister. Renly avoids consummating his and Margaery's marriage due to his homosexuality and sexual relationship with Loras. In the Iron Islands, Balon plans an attack on the North, led by Yara. Conflicted, Theon burns his letter to Robb warning of Balon's impending attack and affirms his allegiance to House Greyjoy in a water-based ceremony. In King's Landing, Tyrion imprisons Pycelle after determining he is Cersei's informant. Tyrion appoints his lover, Shae, as Sansa's handmaiden, both to protect Shae and watch Sansa. Beyond the Wall, Craster demands the Night's Watchmen leave. Jon discovers that Jeor Mormont has always known about and ignored Craster's human sacrifices. On the road to the wall, the Night's Watch recruits are attacked by Lannister soldiers searching for Gendry. Yoren is killed, and Arya and Gendry are taken prisoner. To protect Gendry, Arya falsely states that a boy the soldiers have killed, Lommy, was Gendry.
Robb's army attacks a Lannister Army at Oxcross and claims another victory, meeting a healer girl named Talisa Maegyr in the aftermath. In response, Joffrey publicly abuses Sansa as revenge for Robb's victories until Tyrion intervenes. The dwarf sends two prostitutes to the young King to calm his tempers, but Joffrey makes one of them beat the other brutally, thus threatening Tyrion not to interfere with his business. Catelyn attempts to unite the Baratheon brothers against the Lannisters, but Stannis demands Renly's loyalty to him as king. Littlefinger visits Catelyn and relays Tyrion's offer to trade Jaime for her daughters. Davos witnesses Melisandre giving birth to a shadow creature. Tyrion releases Pycelle and dismisses him from the Small Council. When Tyrion discovers Cersei's incestuous relationship with their cousin, Lancel, he blackmails Lancel into spying on Cersei, threatening to reveal the relationship to Joffrey. Arya and Gendry are taken to Harrenhal castle as captives. Prisoners are systematically tortured to death until Tywin arrives and demands they be used as labor. Impressed by Arya's feistiness, Tywin makes her his personal cupbearer without deducing her true identity. After an exhausting journey through the desert, Daenerys arrives at the prosperous city of Qarth. Xaro Xhoan Daxos, a member of the Council of Thirteen, persuades fellow councilmen to allow Daenerys and her retinue to enter the city.
At Harrenhal, Jaqen H'ghar, a Faceless Assassin and one of three caged prisoners Arya previously saved from a fire, pledges to kill any three people she chooses to repay his debt to her. Her first choice is the Tickler, the man who mortally tortures the captives. Renly is killed by Melisandre's shadowy assassin. Brienne is accused of the murder and Catelyn forces her to flee the camp. Excluding the Tyrells, Renly's forces join Stannis. Brienne swears life-long fealty to Catelyn for having saved her life. Theon sails from Pyke, and against Yara's orders, intends to prove he is a true Ironborn by capturing Winterfell during Robb's absence. Lancel tells Tyrion about wildfire, a mass-produced explosive substance hidden in the city's dungeons and intended to destroy Stannis' fleet and army during the impending siege. Tyrion then takes control of the scheme. In the north, the Night's Watch arrives at an ancient fortress called the Fist of the First Men. Jeor Mormont hands command of Jon over to legendary ranger Qhorin Halfhand, who is leading a team to the Frostfang mountains to spy on the gathering wildling host. In Qarth, Xaro proposes marriage to Daenerys in exchange for providing her his wealth to conquer the Seven Kingdoms. Ser Jorah convinces her to instead gain the Westerosi peoples' support.
Against Cersei's wishes, Tyrion sends her and Jaime's daughter, Myrcella, to Dorne to secure a marriage alliance with House Martell. Theon captures Winterfell and executes Ser Rodrik Cassel. Osha, the captive Wildling, along with Hodor, helps Bran and Rickon escape. In the aftermath of another battle, Robb reunites with Talisa. Jon captures a Wildling named Ygritte, but is separated from Qhorin's group while pursuing her after she escapes. Joffrey's mistreatment of the starving common folk incites a riot at King's Landing, in which he is nearly killed and the Hound saves Sansa from being raped. Littlefinger works to broker an alliance between Tywin and House Tyrell. At Harrenhal, Arya has Jaqen kill Amory Lorch when he discovers her spying on the Lannister battle plans. Robb receives news about Theon's treachery and sends men to retake Winterfell. At Qarth, Daenerys works to procure a ship to transport an army to Westeros while keeping Xaro at bay. One of Daenerys' maids, Irri, is killed and her dragons stolen.
Theon and his men pursue Bran and Rickon. Tywin launches an investigation into Amory's assassination. Jon recaptures Ygritte, but she escapes again, leading him into a trap. Still shaken from the riot, Sansa is horrified that she has begun menstruating and is now old enough to marry and bear Joffrey's children. Cersei advises her to love no one but her children, not even Joffrey. In Robb's camp, Jaime's failed escape leaves a guard dead and some soldiers seeking retribution. In Qarth, the warlock Pyat Pree says he stole Daenerys' dragons; he offers her the opportunity to reunite with them, then slaughters the Council of Thirteen and establishes Xaro as king. In Winterfell, Theon presents the charred corpses of two farm boys to Maester Luwin, claiming they are Bran and Rickon.
Robb learns that Catelyn secretly freed Jaime Lannister, who Brienne is escorting to King's Landing to exchange for Sansa and Arya; Robb places his mother under house arrest and sends men to recapture Jaime. Yara arrives at Winterfell and criticizes Theon's seizing it, as he will not receive reinforcements to hold it. He refuses to return to Pyke with her. When Tywin leaves Harrenhal to attack Robb, Arya coerces Jaqen into helping her, Gendry, and their friend, Hot Pie to escape. In King's Landing, Cersei gets revenge on Tyrion for sending Myrcella to Dorne by abducting Ros, whom she mistakenly believes is his secret lover. Joffrey chastises Varys for not having more knowledge of Stark positions, and prepares to lead the attack against Stannis himself. En route to King's Landing, Stannis promises to make Davos his Hand of the King. Beyond the Wall, the Wildling leader, "Rattleshirt", leads the captured Jon and Halfhand to his king, Mance Rayder. At the Fist of the First Men, the brothers of the Night's Watch find a hidden cache of dragonglass weapons. In Qarth, Jorah agrees to accompany Daenerys to the House of the Undying to retrieve her dragons. Bran and Rickon are revealed to be alive and hiding in the Winterfell crypts.
Stannis' fleet assaults King's Landing. Sansa plays the game, trying to manipulate Joffrey into leading the attack personally, (in hopes of getting him killed), but Joffrey turns out to be too afraid to fight personally. Leading the defense, Tyrion destroys the majority of Stannis's fleet with wildfire, including Davos's ship, however a significant force still manages to attack the castle. The Hound, overcome by his fear of fire, denounces Joffrey and deserts the battlefield. Joffrey retreats in fear as Tyrion rallies the Gold Cloaks into fighting with him. Stannis' forces enter the castle, but Tyrion leads his men behind them and mounts a rearguard attack. Cersei goes to the throne room with Tommen, intending to commit suicide rather than be captured. Tyrion is betrayed and wounded by one of the Kingsguard, Mandon Moore, but saved by his squire Pod. The Hound offers to take Sansa to Winterfell, but she is still scared of him and refuses. Tywin and Loras arrive with a combined Lannister-Tyrell army at the last minute to save the city, but Stannis escapes.
Joffrey sets Sansa aside to marry Margaery Tyrell and ally with the Tyrell family. Tyrion recovers from his wounds and fears that Cersei tried to have him killed. Melisandre comforts a defeated Stannis by showing his future glory in the flames. Brienne kills Stark soldiers after they recognize Jaime. Against Catelyn's advice, Robb marries Talisa, breaking his promise to wed Walder Frey's daughter. In Qarth, inside the House of the Undying, Daenerys enters a simulacrum of a destroyed Iron Throne room, then is reunited with what appears to be Khal Drogo and their infant son. Knowing it is an illusion, she leaves and successfully retrieves her dragons, who burn the House to the ground, killing Pyat. She seals Xaro and her traitorous servant Doreah inside his empty vault, claims his wealth and purchases a ship to leave Qarth. In Winterfell, Theon's men betray and hand him over to the besieging northmen in exchange for passage for themselves back to the Iron Islands. Winterfell is torched. Fatally wounded, Maester Luwin convinces Osha to take Bran and Rickon to the Wall to seek protection from Jon. After Arya, Hot Pie, and Gendry escape Harrenhal, Jaqen gives Arya a coin he says can be used to find him in Braavos. Before her, he magically changes his face and departs. North of the Wall, Qhorin Halfhand forces Jon to kill him and pretend to join the wildlings so that he can spy on them. An army of White Walkers and dead men surrounds the Fist of the First Men; Sam hides, watching in horror as they pass.