After the White Walkers' attack on the Fist of the First Men, the surviving Night's Watchmen, including Samwell Tarly and Jeor Mormont, pledge to return to the Wall and warn the Seven Kingdoms. Jon is brought before Mance Rayder, the "King beyond the Wall", and pledges his loyalty to the Wildlings. Robb finds Harrenhal abandoned by the Lannisters, with its inhabitants slaughtered. He orders his bannerman Roose Bolton to garrison the castle and lead the search for Jaime Lannister. A scarred Tyrion Lannister attempts to negotiate Casterly Rock from Tywin, who offers lesser promises and threatens to hang any whores that he catches his son with. Margaery Tyrell engages in charitable acts with King's Landing orphans. Littlefinger offers to help Sansa Stark escape King's Landing. Ros warns Shae to distrust Littlefinger. Davos is rescued by Saan, who wants to break ties with Stannis Baratheon. Davos returns to Dragonstone where he unsuccessfully tries to kill Melisandre and is imprisoned. She blames him for convincing Stannis not to let her join the battle. In Essos, Daenerys Targaryen arrives in Astapor to buy an army of brutally-trained mercenary soldiers called the "Unsullied". The Qarth warlocks attempt to assassinate her, but Barristan Selmy, a former Kingsguard commander, saves her and pledges his loyalty.
Brienne continues escorting Jaime Lannister across the Riverlands to King's Landing. He engages her in a fight, which is interrupted by Bolton soldiers who capture them. Robb Stark receives news that Winterfell was sacked, and his brothers Bran and Rickon have been killed by Theon. Robb has lost the support of House Frey after breaking his promise to marry one of Lord Walder's granddaughters, while his bannerman Lord Rickard Karstark is furious at the release of Jaime. Arya Stark, Gendry and Hot Pie also make for Riverrun, but are waylaid by the outlaw group "The Brotherhood without Banners". They stop at an inn, where the captured Hound exposes Arya's identity. Margaery and her grandmother Olenna, the "Queen of Thorns", question Sansa about Joffrey's troubling personality and suggest that she visit Highgarden. Theon Greyjoy is held in a dungeon and tortured by unknown captors. Bran, Rickon, Osha, and Hodor encounter siblings Jojen and Meera Reed, children of Stark bannerman, Howland Reed. Jojen, who has prophetic dreams, tells Bran that he is a warg with the ability to enter animals' minds.
Robb and Catelyn attend Hoster Tully's funeral in Riverrun. Tywin Lannister sends Littlefinger to the Eyrie to marry Lysa Arryn to secure her allegiance, and appoints Tyrion as the new Master of Coin. Arya and Gendry are taken captive by the Brotherhood, while Hot Pie is allowed to remain behind to work at the inn. Mance Rayder sends Jon and a band of Wildlings led by Tormund Giantsbane to scale the Wall and attack Castle Black from its weakly defended back. The surviving Night's Watch men return to Craster's Keep, where Gilly gives birth to a son. Theon is freed from the dungeon by a mysterious stranger, who tells him that he is being held by one of his jealous uncles. Melisandre leaves Dragonstone, mysteriously stating that the blood of a king is required for victory. Daenerys barters for the 8,000 Unsullied and the translator Missandei in exchange for one of her young dragons, ignoring Barristan's and Jorah's protestations. Jaime persuades his captor, Locke, to prevent Brienne being raped by claiming her father will pay a huge ransom; Locke agrees but he then severs Jaime's right hand without warning.
After learning that Theon staged Bran and Rickon's deaths Theon's "rescuer" betrays him, returning him to the dungeon for further torture. After a failed escape attempt, Jaime believes himself lost without his sword hand; Brienne urges him to remain hopeful. Varys tells Tyrion how he became a eunuch, then shows him the sorcerer who castrated him, who is now his captive. He advises Tyrion to be patient in his quest for vengeance against Cersei. At Craster's Keep, the surviving Night's Watchmen, starving, come into conflict with their host. Craster and Mormont are slain in the struggle, and Sam flees with Gilly and her new-born son. Arya and Gendry are taken to the Brotherhood's secret cave, meeting their leader, Beric Dondarrion, who demands that the Hound undergo a trial by combat for his crimes. Margaery proposes that Sansa marry Loras, which Sansa finds agreeable, unaware that he is gay. Daenerys meets with slaver Kraznys to trade one dragon for the Unsullied army. Once the deal is struck, she commands the Unsullied to kill all the slave masters, and has her dragon burn Kraznys; she frees the Unsullied, who willingly follow her.
Tyrion, knowing the Crown is deeply in debt to the Iron Bank, persuades Olenna to pay for half of the royal wedding. Sansa tells Littlefinger she wants to remain in King's Landing, as she secretly hopes to marry Loras. Littlefinger uncovers the Tyrell-Varys plot to marry Sansa to Loras and informs Tywin. To circumvent this, he decides to marry Sansa to Tyrion, and Cersei to Loras over both Lannister's objections. Stannis confesses his infidelity to his fanatical wife, Selyse, who says she knows and approves. Their daughter, Princess Shireen, sneaks into the dungeon to visit Davos and teaches him to read. The Hound is released after killing Beric in the trial by combat. Thoros resurrects Beric, using the Lord of Light's power. Gendry decides to join the Brotherhood, who intend to ransom Arya to Robb. After being delivered to Roose Bolton at Harrenhal, and having his stump treated by the disgraced former maester Qyburn, a delirious Jaime reveals to Brienne that he killed "Mad" King Aerys Targaryen to prevent him from destroying King's Landing with wildfire. Robb executes Lord Karstark after the latter murders two captive Lannister boys. With the Karstarks abandoning him, a desperate Robb hopes to renew his alliance with Walder Frey. Ygritte seduces Jon, who breaks his Night's Watch vows. Daenerys encourages the Unsullied to choose a leader among them; they choose Grey Worm.
In King's Landing, Tywin coerces Olenna into an agreement to marry Cersei to Loras. Cersei tells Tyrion that it was Joffrey, not her, who ordered Ser Mandon to kill him during the battle. Tyrion informs Shae and Sansa about his and Sansa's upcoming wedding. Littlefinger gloats to Varys at having foiled his plot with the Tyrells and reveals that he has handed Varys's informant Ros over to Joffrey, who has tortured and killed her. In the Riverlands, Melisandre purchases Gendry from the Brotherhood, and foretells that Arya will kill many people with brown eyes, green eyes, and blue eyes; and that they will meet again. Walder Frey agrees to renew his alliance with Robb in exchange for an in-person apology and for his uncle Edmure Tully, the new Lord of Riverrun, to marry one of his granddaughters in Robb's place. Roose Bolton agrees to send Jaime back to King's Landing, but refuses to allow Brienne to accompany him. At an unknown location, the mysterious man continues torturing Theon. In the North, tension arises between Osha and Meera. Beyond the Wall, Sam continues his flight with Gilly, while Jon and Ygritte scale the Wall with the wildlings Tormund and Orell.
In the North, Jojen tells Bran they must not stop at Castle Black, but travel beyond the Wall to find the Three-eyed Raven; Osha warns them about the White Walkers. Jon and Ygritte's relationship deepens, angering jealous Wildling, Orell. After learning that Theon's greatest pride is his sexual prowess, Theon's torturer castrates him. Robb learns that Talisa is pregnant. Disgusted that they sold Gendry, Arya escapes the Brotherhood, only to be captured by the Hound. Melisandre tells Gendry that his father was King Robert. Shae warns Tyrion that their relationship will end once he marries Sansa. Tywin and Joffrey discuss Daenerys; Tywin dismisses her as a potential threat. Daenerys reaches Yunkai and declares war on the city. Roose Bolton abandons Harrenhal for Edmure Tully's wedding at the Twins while Jaime bids Brienne farewell as he departs for King's Landing. Having a change of heart, Jaime returns to Harrenhal and rescues Brienne from a bear pit she had been trapped in by Locke.
King's Landing hosts Tyrion and Sansa's wedding. Cersei shows her displeasure towards Margaery and Loras. At the wedding feast, Tyrion causes a drunken scene. Tywin demands that Tyrion quickly produce a Lannister heir, but Tyrion later assures Sansa their marriage will never be consummated without her consent. Sandor tells Arya that he is taking her to the Twins to ransom her to Robb. Stannis releases Davos, demanding that he respect Melisandre. She arrives in Dragonstone with Gendry, whom she seduces to extract his blood using leeches. In a magical ritual, Stannis casts the blood-filled leeches into a fire while naming the three usurpers: Robb Stark, Balon Greyjoy, and King Joffrey. Daenerys learns that Yunkai has employed mercenaries called the "Second Sons" to defend the city. One of their handsome lieutenants, Daario Naharis, kills the other leaders and pledges the company's loyalty to Daenerys. Sam and Gilly are attacked by a White Walker, which Sam destroys with a dragonglass dagger.
Sam, Gilly, and her son arrive at the Wall. While hiding in a tower during a thunderstorm, Bran enters a panicked Hodor's mind to prevent his accidentally revealing their hiding place to a group of Wildlings below, unbeknownst to them including Jon. Jon is suspected of still being loyal to the Night's Watch when he refuses to murder a farmer, whom Ygritte kills. Bran wargs into Summer to save Jon, who kills Orell before escaping, leaving a furious Ygritte behind with chief Tormund. Osha, Rickon, and his direwolf, Shaggydog, depart for the Last Hearth, to seek shelter from Stark bannermen House Umber, while Bran, Meera, Jojen, Hodor and Bran's direwolf, Summer, plan to go beyond the Wall to find the Three Eyed Raven. With their army having defected, Yunkai agrees to Daenerys's demand to release all of its slaves. Robb arrives at the Twins and apologises to Walder for reneging on his marriage pact. Walder appears to accept his apology while Edmure marries Roslin Frey, Walder's sole pretty granddaughter. After the newlyweds leave the feast, Walder's men suddenly attack their guests, murdering Stark's men, as well as Talisa and Catelyn, while Roose Bolton, who had secretly made a deal with the Lannisters, betrays and kills Robb. Ser Brynden "Blackfish" Tully, Catelyn's uncle, survives, having excused himself from the feast just prior to the slaughter to relieve himself. The Hound and Arya arrive at the Twins during the massacre, but the Hound carries Arya to safety.
The "Red Wedding's" mastermind is revealed to be Tywin Lannister, who rewards House Frey with the Seat of Riverrun and appoints Roose Bolton as Warden of the North. Theon learns that his captor is Ramsay Snow, Roose's bastard son, who had also been responsible for torching Winterfell, having betrayed the Ironborn who handed Theon over to him and killed them. Ramsay sends Theon's severed phallus to Balon with a demand that he remove his men from the north. While Balon is happy to give up on Theon, Yara leads a mission to rescue him. Arya and the Hound kill some Frey soldiers they encounter who are mocking Robb's death. Jaime and Brienne arrive in King's Landing where Jamie is reunited with Cersei. Sam and Gilly encounter Bran's party in the Night Fort and Bran has Sam promise not to tell Jon that he is still alive. Sam returns to Castle Black with Gilly and Maester Aemon has him send ravens to warn the Seven Kingdoms about the White Walkers. Ygritte pursues Jon and shoots him with three arrows, but can't bring herself to kill him. He escapes, returning wounded to Castle Black. In Dragonstone, Davos helps Gendry escape to prevent him from being sacrificed to the Lord of Light. He persuades Stannis to respond to the Night's Watch's letter and provide them with aid in their war against the Wildlings and White Walkers. In Essos, the freed Yunkai slaves hail Daenerys as "Mhysa" (mother).