Tywin oversees the reforging of Ice, House Stark's ancestral Valyrian steel sword, into two new ones. One is for Jaime, who grieves the loss of his sword hand and Cersei's love, and the other is a wedding present for King Joffrey, which Joffrey names Widow's Wail. Prince Oberyn Martell, representing his infirm brother, Prince Doran of Dorne, arrives in King's Landing  to attend the royal wedding. He and his paramour, Ellaria Sand, are greeted by Tyrion. Oberyn tells Tyrion that he has another motive for coming to the capital, as he is seeking revenge against Lannisters and Gregor Clegane for the rape and murder of his sister, Elia, wife of the unfaithful Prince Rhaegar Targaryen. In the North, Styr and the cannibalistic Thenns reinforce Tormund, Ygritte and the other Wildlings forces south of the wall. Maester Aemon absolves Jon after he justifies his actions while with the Wildlings and reveals that their army of 100,000 plans to attack Castle Black. In the Riverlands, the Hound and Arya head to the Eyrie where the Hound intends to ransom Arya to her Aunt Lysa, Jon Arryn's widow. Along the way, they get into a fight with a group of Gregor Clegane's soldiers in an inn and Arya reclaims her sword, Needle, from Polliver, killing him. In Essos, Daenerys marches her army towards Meereen, the last and largest of the three great slave cities; she fears she is losing control over her growing dragons, now horse-sized.
Roose Bolton returns to the Dreadfort with his bride, one of Walder Frey's daughters. He chastises Ramsay for torturing and castrating Theon, devaluing him as a hostage. Theon, who has degenerated into a subservient persona called 'Reek', discloses that Bran and Rickon Stark are alive and threaten Roose's legitimacy as Warden of the North. Roose orders Ramsay to reclaim the territories under Ironborn occupation, promising a reward if he succeeds, while also sending Locke to capture Bran and Rickon. In Dragonstone, Melisandre sacrifices three people, including Stannis' brother-in-law, burning them to death as a tribute to the Lord of Light, delighting Queen Selyse and disgusting Ser Davos and Princess Shireen. To protect Shae from his family, Tyrion arranges to send her to Pentos across the Narrow Sea, leaving her distressed. Bronn secretly trains Jaime to be able to fight with his left hand. King Joffrey and Margaery Tyrell are wed. During the Royal Wedding feast, Joffrey publicly humiliates Tyrion and taunts Sansa just before he fatally succumbs to poisoned wine. A distraught Cersei accuses Tyrion of the murder and has him arrested, while Ser Dontos Hollard, Joffrey's fool and a former knight, persuades Sansa to leave the feast with him for her protection.
Tywin grooms his young grandson Tommen to be the new king and enlists Oberyn and Mace Tyrell as his fellow judges for Tyrion's impending murder trial. Tyrion chooses Jaime as his witness. Littlefinger, who hired Ser Dontos to retrieve Sansa, has him killed, then smuggles her out of King's Landing aboard his ship. In the Riverlands, Arya and the Hound are offered hospitality by a peasant farmer and his daughter, whom the Hound soon robs, angering Arya. To replenish Stannis' depleted forces, Davos wants to request a loan from the Iron Bank of Braavos to hire a mercenary army from Essos. At Castle Black, Sam fears for Gilly's safety and moves her and Little Sam to nearby Mole's Town. Meanwhile, the Wildlings continue to raid northern villages. The Night's Watch learns that the mutineers are camped at Craster's Keep. Jon proposes an attack on them to prevent them leaking Castle Black's defense weaknesses to Mance Rayder's approaching army. Daenerys arrives at Meereen and gives a rousing speech before the gates, offering the city's slaves their freedom.
Daenerys easily captures Meereen, instigating a slave revolt. Seeking justice for 163 slain slave children, she nails 163 masters to the same road posts. At sea, Littlefinger tells Sansa that he had plotted Joffrey's murder with the Tyrells and that it was Olenna who had administered the poison to protect her granddaughter. Before leaving King's Landing, Olenna reveals her guilt to Margaery and urges her to seduce Tommen, who will be a much kinder and more pliable husband. Jaime believes Tyrion is innocent, but Cersei is adamant he is guilty and also orders Jaime to locate and kill Sansa, whom she believes was an accomplice. Jaime instead sends Brienne to find and protect Sansa, presenting her with new armor, his Valyrian Steel sword, which she names Oathkeeper, horses and Podrick Payne as her squire. In the North, hoping to eliminate Jon, Alliser Thorne and Janos Slynt agree to allow Jon to lead the expedition against the mutineers. Unknown to Jon, the mutineers have captured Bran and his companions. Further north, a White Walker takes Craster's last newborn son to a secret ritual site where he is transformed into a Walker by the Night King.
Tommen is crowned king and Cersei surprises Margaery by apparently approving of her match with Tommen. Tywin asks Oberyn to be a judge at Tyrion's trial and swears his innocence in Elia's rape and murder. In the Vale, Littlefinger takes Sansa to the Eyrie where she is reunited with her aunt, Lysa Arryn, who pressures Littlefinger to marry her immediately. It is revealed that Littlefinger had manipulated Lysa into poisoning her husband Jon Arryn and framing the Lannisters, setting the conflict between the Starks and Lannisters in motion. Lysa plans for Sansa to marry her son, Robin, an emotionally immature prepubescent boy. The Hound mocks Arya practicing her water dancing and disparages Syrio Forel's fighting style. Brienne learns that Podrick lacks practical squiring skills but is impressed he killed a Kingsguard to protect Tyrion. Beyond the Wall, Jon's group find and defeat the mutineers, while Rast, attempting to escape, is killed by Ghost. Unknown to Jon, Bran and his companions are captives there. Locke attempts to kidnap Bran in the confusion, but Hodor, warged into by Bran, kills him and frees the others. Jojen convinces Bran that they must continue north, while Jon's men burn Craster's Keep and free his daughter/wives. In Meereen, after Jorah informs Daenerys that Astapor and Yunkai have reverted to slavery, she postpones invading Westeros to instead rule as queen until Slaver's Bay is truly free.
In Essos, Davos and Stannis meet with Tycho Nestoris of the Iron Bank to secure a loan for Stannis. Davos re-engages Salladhor Saan and his pirates to transport Stannis' army north. In Meereen, Daenerys adapts to her new role as queen, hearing her subjects' endless requests, including nobleman Hizdahr zo Loraq who wishes to reclaim his crucified father's body, and a peasant man whose goats were killed by Daenerys' increasingly uncontrollable dragons. Yara leads a mission to rescue Theon at the Dreadfort, however, fearing it is a trap, Theon refuses to leave forcing Yara to abandon him. Ramsay rewards Theon's obedience and, planning to capture Moat Cailin from the Ironborn, tasks "Reek" to impersonate "Theon Greyjoy". In King's Landing, Tywin puts a bounty on the Hound's head and instructs Varys to continue spying on Daenerys. Tyrion is tried for Joffrey's murder. All the witnesses testify against him, including Ser Meryn Trant, Grand Maester Pycelle, Cersei, and Varys, who give compelling, though circumstantial, testimony. Tywin tells Jaime that he will spare Tyrion's life and let him join the Night's Watch, if he confesses his guilt and Jaime quits the Kingsguard and takes his place as Tywin's heir. Tyrion initially agrees, however when Shae falsely testifies against him, he angrily denounces the whole of King's Landing as liars and demands a trial by combat.
Cersei appoints Ser Gregor Clegane, the Mountain, as the champion for the prosecution in Tyrion's upcoming trial by combat. Jaime and Bronn decline to fight the Mountain for Tyrion, but Oberyn accepts. He seeks to avenge his sister, Elia's rape and murder by the Mountain during Robert's Rebellion. Daenerys takes Daario as her lover, then sends him to handle the resurgent slavers in Yunkai. Melisandre and Selyse prepare to depart Dragonstone, intending to take Shireen with them. As the Wildlings approach Castle Black, Alliser Thorne rejects Jon's suggestion that they seal the tunnel. At an inn, Brienne and Podrick meet Hot Pie, who updates them about Arya. They resolve to travel to the Vale, deducing that she would seek shelter from her aunt. In the Vale, Lysa witnesses Littlefinger kissing Sansa. Enraged, she threatens to throw Sansa through the Moon Door, a circular opening in the floor with a steep drop to rocks below; Littlefinger intervenes and, after admitting to Lysa that he always loved her sister Catelyn rather than her, shoves Lysa to her death.
The Wildlings attack Mole's Town. Ygritte discovers Gilly hiding and spares her and Little Sam. Ramsay forces Theon to negotiate with the Ironborn to surrender Moat Cailin. The Ironborn agree, hoping to return home, but Ramsay reneges his promise and has them flayed to death. As a reward for securing Moat Cailin, Roose legitimizes Ramsay as a Bolton, making him his heir. At the Eyrie, the Lords of the Vale investigate Lysa's death. Sansa reveals her true identity to them and corroborates Littlefinger's story that she committed suicide, enabling Littlefinger to assume the role of Robin's guardian. The Hound and Arya arrive at the Gates of the Moon, only to leave upon learning of Lysa's death. In King's Landing, the trial by combat begins. Oberyn grievously wounds the Mountain, however delays finishing him off as he wants him to publicly confess his and Tywin's culpability in Elia's murder. Near death, the Mountain trips Oberyn and brutally crushes his skull while boasting that he raped and murdered Elia and her children. Tywin sentences Tyrion to death. In Essos, Grey Worm and Missandei grow closer. Barristan Selmy intercepts a long-delayed pardon from King Robert for Jorah as a reward for spying on Daenerys. He gives this to Daenerys, who is deaf to Jorah's remorse and banishes him from her service.
The Night's Watch prepares the Castle Black defences ahead of the upcoming battle with the Wildlings. Maester Aemon reveals that he is secretly a Targaryen and could have once been King of Westeros. Gilly and Little Sam escape Mole's Town and arrive at Castle Black, where Sam hides them. The Wildlings attack from both sides of the wall and Pyp is killed by an arrow from Ygritte. Tormund's army breaks through from the south and engages the Night's Watch, while the Wildlings climbing the wall are obliterated by a massive swinging scythe trap. A giant breaches the tunnel into Castle Black but is killed by Grenn and five others, at the cost of their own lives. Alliser Thorne is wounded in a duel with Tormund and forced to withdraw, leaving Jon to take charge of the defence. After seeing Jon kill Styr, Ygritte aims her bow at him but hesitates, then is fatally shot by Olly, dying in Jon's arms. Assisted by Ghost, Jon's direwolf, the Night's Watch secure Castle Black's inner keep, and a wounded Tormund is captured. The Wildlings retreat for the night. Jon goes beyond the Wall on a suicide mission to find and kill Mance Rayder, believing that the Wildling army will fragment without his command.
Jon's meeting with Mance Rayder abruptly ends when Stannis and his army overrun the Wildling camp, taking Mance prisoner. Bran finds the weirwood tree from his visions but wights attack the group, killing Jojen. A Child of the Forest saves the others and takes them to the Three-Eyed Raven, revealed to be an old man encased within tree roots inside a secure cave. In the Vale, Brienne and Podrick encounter Arya and the Hound. A misunderstanding leads to the Hound and Brienne having a duel; which ends with Brienne pushing the Hound off a cliff. The Hound, grievously wounded, begs Arya to kill him, but she takes his money and leaves him for dead. She boards a ship headed to Braavos to find Jaqen H'ghar. In King's Landing, Cersei orders Qyburn to save the life of the Mountain, who was poisoned by Oberyn's blade. Jaime releases Tyrion from prison, but before escaping the city, Tyrion finds Shae in Tywin's bed and fatally strangles her. He confronts and kills Tywin on the privy with a crossbow, then is smuggled aboard a ship by Varys. In Meereen, a citizen brings Daenerys his daughter's charred remains, burned by dragon fire. Realising they are too dangerous to remain free, Daenerys chains Rhaegal and Viserion in the catacombs, however Drogon cannot be found.