At the Twins, Arya, disguised as Walder Frey, poisons the remaining lords of House Frey. The White Walkers march toward the Wall. Edd receives Bran and Meera at Castle Black. At Winterfell, Sansa objects when Jon accepts the loyalties of Houses Umber and Karstark, whose previous leaders supported Ramsay. Queen Cersei demands that the North bend the knee. At the Citadel, Samwell "borrows" restricted library books, learning there is a large deposit of dragonglass at Dragonstone; he sends word to Jon. Sam finds Jorah, now heavily infected with greyscale, quarantined in a cell. In the Riverlands, Arya meets some friendly Lannister soldiers, and "jokingly" claims she will kill Cersei. The Hound begins to believe in the Lord of Light after Thoros shows him a fiery vision of the Wall and the Army of the Dead. In King's Landing, Jaime tells Cersei they crucially need allies. Euron arrives to propose marriage in exchange for his Iron Fleet and an opportunity to kill Theon and Yara. Cersei declines over his untrustworthiness; Euron promises to return with a gift that will prove his loyalty. Daenerys arrives at Dragonstone, House Targaryen's ancestral home, with her army and large dragons.
Daenerys heeds Tyrion's advice not to take King's Landing by force, which would kill thousands. Yara's fleet is sent to Sunspear to transport the Dornish army to lay siege to King's Landing alongside the Tyrell forces; the Unsullied are to take Casterly Rock. Daenerys challenges Varys' loyalty and threatens to burn him alive if he ever betrays her. Melisandre arrives and encourages Daenerys to invite Jon Snow to Dragonstone, saying he is integral to the war. Grey Worm and Missandei consummate their relationship. Cersei summons several lords, demanding their fealty, while Jaime offers to elevate Randyll Tarly as Warden of the South. Qyburn shows Cersei a prototype ballista capable of killing dragons. Arya is reunited with Hot Pie, who tells her the Boltons are dead and Jon is now King in the North. She resets course for Winterfell. Jon sets sails for Dragonstone to request Daenerys' help against the White Walkers, leaving Sansa in charge at Winterfell. He warns Littlefinger to never touch Sansa. Sam performs a forbidden surgery on Jorah's greyscale infection. Euron's fleet attacks Yara's, killing Obara and Nymeria and capturing Ellaria, Tyene, and Yara. Theon, experiencing flashbacks as Reek, jumps overboard.
Jon arrives at Dragonstone. He refuses Daenerys’ demands to bend the knee, and instead asks her help fighting the Army of the Dead. On Tyrion's advice, Daenerys allows Jon to mine the island's dragonglass. Melisandre avoids Jon and departs for Volantis, telling Varys she will return to Westeros. Bran, with Meera, arrives at Winterfell and reveals his new Three-Eyed Raven identity to Sansa. In King's Landing, Euron presents Ellaria and Tyene as gifts to Cersei, who promises him marriage after the war is won. She makes him commander of her navy. Cersei administers the same poison to Tyene that killed Myrcella; Ellaria will watch her daughter die and remain imprisoned with the body. A healed Jorah leaves Oldtown to find Daenerys. Ebrose praises Sam's skill in saving Jorah then makes him copy old texts for his disobedience. Grey Worm and the Unsullied attack Casterly Rock but discover that Jaime has led the bulk of the Lannister forces to attack Highgarden, while Euron's fleet ambushes and destroys the Unsullied's ships. The Lannister forces quickly overwhelm Olenna Tyrell's army. Jaime offers Olenna a quick and painless death by poison. After drinking it, she reveals she poisoned Joffrey.
Arya returns to Winterfell and is reunited with Sansa and Bran. Littlefinger presents Bran with the Valyrian steel dagger his would-be assassin used. Bran gives the dagger to Arya. Bran bids a homeward-bound Meera an unemotional farewell, explaining he is no longer Bran. Arya spars with Brienne, impressing her and amazing Sansa with her exceptional fighting skills. Cersei assures the Iron Bank full repayment of the Lannister's debt as a wagon train carrying gold from Highgarden travels to King's Landing. In a cave filled with dragonglass, Jon reveals ancient wall paintings to Daenerys depicting the First Men and the Children of the Forest joining forces against the undead. Daenerys learns that the attack on Casterly Rock was a diversion and Lannister forces have captured Highgarden. Ignoring Tyrion's protests, Daenerys rides Drogon as the Dothraki cavalry launches a surprise attack on the Lannister army, decimating it and capturing its remaining forces. Drogon is slightly wounded when Bronn fires a bolt from Qyburn's new scorpion ballista weapon, but he and Daenerys land safely. Jaime's desperate charge on horseback at a vulnerable Daenerys is thwarted by Drogon spewing fire. Bronn tackles Jaime into a river, saving him.
Jaime and Bronn return to King's Landing. Daenerys offers the surviving Lannister soldiers the choice to bend the knee or death. Randyll Tarly and his son, Dickon, refuse her offer, and against Tyrion's advice, Daenerys has Drogon incinerate them. Jorah is reunited with Daenerys at Dragonstone. Maester Wolkan alerts Jon and the Citadel about the wights approaching Eastwatch. Jon proposes capturing a wight beyond the Wall to prove their existence and convince Cersei to accept a temporary alliance. Davos smuggles Tyrion inside King's Landing to secretly meet with Jaime to propose an armistice. Cersei accepts, and she also informs Jaime she is pregnant with their child. While in King's Landing, Davos finds Gendry and takes him back to Dragonstone. With the Citadel ignoring Maester Wolkan's warning letter, Sam, frustrated, leaves the Citadel with Gilly and Little Sam, taking several restricted books with him. At Winterfell, Littlefinger, knowing Arya is spying on him, lures her into finding the letter that Sansa was forced to write as a hostage in King's Landing. Jon, Jorah, and Gendry take the Hound, Thoros, Beric, Tormund and a group of the Free Folk from Eastwatch North beyond the Wall to capture a wight.
At Winterfell, Littlefinger schemes to isolate Sansa. Tensions between Arya and Sansa increase after Arya discovers the letter Sansa was forced to write, begging for Robb's fealty to Joffrey. Sansa, in turn, finds Arya's collection of faces from Braavos. At Dragonstone, Tyrion counsels Daenerys about the upcoming negotiations with Cersei. Beyond the Wall, Jon and the men hunt for a wight to prove the White Walkers' existence. After capturing one, the group is beset by the White Walker army but not before Jon sends Gendry to Eastwatch to dispatch a raven to Daenerys requesting help. During the night, an injured Thoros freezes to death. As the wight army is about to overwhelm Jon's group, Daenerys arrives with her dragons, destroying many wights. The Night King, the White Walkers' leader, kills Viserion, one of Daenerys' dragons, with an ice spear. Daenerys flies off with the men, but is unable to rescue Jon. Benjen Stark intervenes and sacrifices himself to save Jon. When Jon and Daenerys are reunited, Jon pledges himself and the North to Daenerys as Queen. The Night King reanimates Viserion, making the dragon a part of his army.
The wight is presented to the Lannister court. Cersei demands Jon's neutrality, but she storms off when Jon upholds his oath to Daenerys. Tyrion meets with Cersei, apparently gaining her alliance. Cersei reveals to Jaime that she instead will use the Golden Company of Braavos to secure her hold on Westeros and allow the White Walkers to destroy Daenerys and Jon's armies. Disgusted, Jaime rides north to warn Jon and Daenerys. At Dragonstone, Theon wins his men's respect and leads them to rescue Yara. Aboard a North-bound ship, Jon seeks out Daenerys, and they become lovers. At Winterfell, Littlefinger works to increase dissent between Arya and Sansa. Sansa, Arya, and Bran publicly accuse Littlefinger of murdering Jon and Lysa Arryn and of treason against their father. Deserted by the Lords of the Vale, Littlefinger is executed by Arya. Samwell arrives and meets with Bran. Combining Sam's earlier information and Bran's vision, they realize Jon is Aegon Targaryen, the legitimate heir to the Iron Throne. Jon's parents, Rhaegar Targaryen and Lyanna Stark, secretly married. At Eastwatch, the Night King, astride the undead Viserion, blasts a hole through the Wall with blue dragon fire; the Army of the Dead marches through.